# Discriminating News-Reading Behavior and Cognition Using Eye-Tracking Methodologies

## By  
## David Stanton

### A dissertation presented to the graduate school of the University of Florida in partial fulfillment of the the requirements for the degree of doctor of philosophy

#### University of Florida

2013

[Formatting requirements](http://helpdesk.ufl.edu/application-support-center/graduate-editorial-office/format-requirements/general-requirements/)

---

&copy; 2013 David Stanton

---

To my wife Autumn and my daughters, Lucy and Tabitha, for the strength and support to persevere through late nights and endless edits

---

# Acknowledgements

I thank my committee for constructive criticism and motivation that helped me become a better researcher and writer. I thank my wife, Autumn, for enduring my time and poverty as a graduate student. Most importantly, I thank my daughters, Lucy and Tabitha, for always having bright eyes and smiling faces when I come home.

---

# Table of Contents

Should be omitted form Markdown and auto-generated afterward.

---

# List of Tables

Table 4.1. Shows the number of participants for each prototype version and media. 70

Table 4.4. Average fixation frequencies are greatest during initial exposure and decrease over time. Changes are significantly larger for the first three 30-second intervals and level off for the remainder of the exposure. 77

Table 4.5. Probability for what type of visual element will be fixated upon next given the participant is currently looking at a text or ASF element. Reported for print prototypes separately and merged together. 79

Table 4.6 Probability for what type of visual element will be fixated upon next given the participant is currently looking at a text or ASF element. Reported for online prototypes separately and merged together. 79

---

# List of Figures

Auto-generate.

---

# Abstract of Dissertation Presented to the Graduate School of the University of Florida in Partial Fulfillment of the Requirements for the Degree of Doctor of Philosophy

# Discriminating News-Reading Behavior and Cognition Using Eye-Tracking Methodologies

## By  
## David Stanton  
## August 2009

Chair: John Wright  
Major: mass communication

News design is mostly governed by tradition and subjective sense. The effectiveness of the traditions becomes increasingly suspect as print newspaper readership falls and digital platforms multiply. The multitude of news platforms beyond traditional newspaper, radio and television requires a new approach to studying news consumers. The current study utilizes eye-tracking methodologies to directly measure reading behavior and, by proxy, glean understanding in cognition of news story forms.

Direct behavioral measurement is crucial to understanding how individuals detect available visual information, parse the categories of information, prioritize information seeking, and cognitively process that information for memory. Self-report methods can be useful for insight into what news consumers believe they want to look at, but only behavioral methods such as eye tracking can reliably show what visual information individuals look at, for how long and in which patterns.

Understanding reading patterns and subsequent cognition is vital for news designers to make efficient and informed choices of how to select story forms, such as text, maps, charts and other imagery, to convey information as effectively as possible. Informed design choices can lower the cognitive load required to detect, parse and prioritize available visual information, which in turn allows more cognitive resources to be available for in-depth processing, learning and storage.

News designers need guidelines to help them utilize story forms to optimally achieve goals. For example, eye-movement patterns can show which visual structures garner attention, which are ignored and which are looked at first. This study compares 200 participants reading news across three, prototype print newspapers and three, prototype news websites.

News prototypes utilizing story forms designed for specific types of information, such as a map to convey geographic information, yielded better learning as measured by a post-exposure, information-recognition questionnaire. There were some inherent behavioral differences between print and online news prototypes, but these effects were overshadowed by story-form choices. Regardless of print, web or other emerging news platforms, a better understanding of how people read and learn from the news will allow news designers to maximize results and minimize efforts.

---

# Chapter 1  
# Introduction

The influx of digital devices into newspaper production and delivery routines is revolutionizing the industry. But this revolution also raises important questions: How do people read these new platforms and story structures? How will people behave given more choices and more control? How can information be delivered to maximize cognition? If research can better understand how people consume and process news information, news companies will be able to create and deliver content that optimally balances the costs of gathering that information with measurable benefits to the consumer. Benefits could include understanding a public-health issue that allows the individual to make more thoughtful civic decisions. Perhaps the objective is for a reader to be exposed to as much content as possible in order to generate advertising revenue. Or maybe the objective if for an information consumer to make a purchase. Some desired outcomes are altruistic and some aim to maximize profit. Whatever the motive, news companies need better guidelines for how to package and deliver information based on content type and desired outcomes. This spans traditional media, the web, mobile devices and other platforms that have yet to emerge.

Newspapers carry a tradition of being interested in the public good in addition to making money (Merritt, 2005). In order to accomplish these dual roles, news companies need a more systematic process to choose how to allocate time, talent and money in an environment of economic uncertainty. In an effort to give a framework to that process, 200 newspaper readers from Southwest Florida were selected to participate in an eye-tracking study and read newspaper prototypes while having their eye movements recorded from July to November of 2006. The findings of how these people read different visual presentations of the same content will provide the foundation for a quantitative decision framework for news design based on the type of information to be delivered and a measurable outcome of success. 

## The Newspaper Industry in Context

The newspaper industry is at a crossroad. It is facing perhaps unprecedented economic challenges. Circulation numbers for daily newspapers have been declining since all-time peaks in the early 1990s. Total paid circulation has dropped 21.6% since that time (NAA, 2009). Shares of *The New York Times* are essentially flat over the last 18 years, while the Dow Jones Industrial Average has grown four fold before the large drop during the fall of 2008. Over this time period, the Internet came into the public domain and now provides a transmission system for content creators, automated news-filtering application and an infrastructure that gives consumers control of what types of information they want, when and to some extent in what form. Perhaps newspapers are not delivering information in ways that readers want, expect or prefer in this new digital information environment where the user controls what information he or she receives. Individuals are assuming much of the gatekeeping responsibility traditionally handled by newspaper editors (White, 1950; Singer, 2003; Singer, 2005).

Convergence is becoming a stale buzzword. Early in the 2000s, there was a movement to structurally converge newspapers, television and other information media into a single news operation. The movement had minimal success in Florida and even less in states with journalism labor unions (Quinn, 2002). Now information providers create content for many platforms. Instead of merging with a television station, newspapers are producing and distributing original video content through the Internet to websites and mobile devices on their own.

Newspapers are re-defining themselves as information delivery companies rather than printers of paper. But with this immense new toolbox of web, video, audio, mapping, databases, etc., the news industry is in desperate need of metrics to determine resource allocation. Instead of off-the-cuff decisions for using traditional story forms or alternative approaches, publications should be able to use metrics to determine when and how to use story forms and multimedia tools to efficiently achieve a desired outcome such as exposure, recall, recognition, a call to action, sales or other desired outcomes on a story-by-story basis. The current study utilizes print and web-based news prototypes containing many combinations of traditional narratives, information graphics, maps and other story structures that take time and skilled staff to create. Theories of cognition posit that the density of information and the choices available to the news consumer can affect information processing, storage and retrieval (Lang, 2000; Wise, Bolls & Schaefer, 2008). This study will apply and test this concept to different news story forms using eye-tracking methodologies. News companies need a quantitative decision framework to allow the most effective allocation of resources for hiring staff, developing continuing-education programs, purchasing equipment, and creating and distributing information to better serve news consumers and fulfill traditional journalistic missions. 

## Improving Reading Measures

There have been remarkably few studies utilizing quantitative measures of real news reading behavior (Rhee & Capella, 1997), which can include eye tracking, monitoring heart rate and other physiological measures. Much of the research regarding the behavior and habits of newspaper readers is based on survey and other self-report data (Potter, 2008; Tewksbury, Hals & Bibart, 2008; Geiger & Reeves, 1999). While surveys can answer many questions such as those concerning attitude and affect, introspection is an unreliable measure of behavior and not predictive of future behavior. The ability to gauge a feeling or attitude at any particular moment is difficult. Experimental designs help determine what specific changes within a stimulus cause changes in participant reactions to those stimuli. Generalizing beyond the experiment is difficult because the underlying physiological processes of why people change or respond during an experiment are not directly measured. Validly forecasting how people will react to future scenarios can be improved by incorporating physiological measures in order to more validly measure underlying behavioral and cognitive processes. 

Eye-tracking technologies, originally developed to understand how people look at images (Yarbus, 1967), allow a more direct measure of behavior by using cameras to continually record the movement of eyes during visual exposure. These movements serve as indicators of visual detection and information processing, which in turn influences how messages are mentally stored and retrieved. Eye-tracking apparatuses are used in diverse fields such as neuroscience, linguistics, ergonomics and marketing. Up to now, most of the eye-tracking research done to examine how people read online has been conducted from business and marketing perspectives. These studies are often task-oriented, such as requiring the participant to find a piece of information or complete some activity in an effort to optimize the time to complete the task while keeping a low rate of failure during the task. Jakob Nielsen and the Nielsen/Norman Group probably are the most well-known eye-tracking and usability experts for industry applications (Nielsen, 2006) to measure information-seeking strategies while reading Web sites. However, their research objectives raise concerns of improperly generalizing findings to news reading. For example, participants may be told what product or piece of information they are looking for, or they may be given a short task list to complete. Some newspaper readers may have a personal set of tasks to accomplish while reading a newspaper. Others may prefer to "discover" the news. They do not always need to fill a specific gap in their knowledge (Tewksbury et al., 2008). However, research findings based on a task list should not be applied when the individual is in an information-discovery mode. Likewise, findings on how people browse through information should not be applied to understand a user when there is a specific task to accomplish. Both types of information-consumption behaviors are important but must be conceptually separated.

## Research Approach

The expected outcomes or motivations for reading a newspaper can be different than looking at product information, such as being able to make a better voting decision versus buying the appropriate cell phone. But it is understandable why previous findings have been incorrectly applied to scenarios beyond those used in the research -- the findings were all that was available. Eye-tracking studies to measure reading behaviors are expensive, time consuming and statistically intensive. Businesses selling consumer goods have resources to conduct this research because there is a tradition of supporting marketing research with measurable success goals such as increased sales. Success in newspapers had been measured by winning awards. With falling circulation and advertising revenue, newspaper companies are being forced to balance the traditional public service mission with awareness of which stories generate the revenue that was a given for so many years. Newspapers do not have a history of investing in large-scale quantitative research of he content and design of news. Now, lack of cash makes research undertakings even more difficult to begin although research is more important than ever. That is one of the gaps the Poynter Institute is attempting to bridge with its support of eye-tracking research through funding the data-gathering phase of this project and others. Created by newspaper owner Nelson Poynter in 1975, The Poynter Institute is funded by the profits of the *St. Petersburg Times* newspaper, the largest independent newspaper in the United States. The Institute exists partly to provide "practical leadership of successful business" for the media industry (Poynter, 2007a).

The Poynter Institute has the financial resources to undertake large research projects because of its mission to improve the journalism industry as a whole (Poynter, 2007a) instead of having to pay shareholders. The current study is based on raw data collected along with the EyeTrack07 project (Adam, Quinn & Edmonds, 2007), the fourth eye-tracking project conducted by The Poynter Institute. In that project, the Poynter team used head-mounted, eye-tracking gear to record eye movements as people read real-world publications including the *St. Petersburg Times* (print and online), the *Minneapolis Star-Tribune* (print and online), the *Rocky Mountain News* (print) and the *Philadelphia Daily News* (print). The EyeTrack07 study was one of the most expensive and expansive quantitative studies of news-reader behavior ever attempted (Adam, Quinn & Edmonds, 2007). Along with real news publications, Poynter also tracked the eye movements of readers exposed to news prototypes. The current study will use these news prototypes as the foundation for a quantitative framework to help content producers more efficiently and effectively package and transmit news to consumers through different media and storytelling structures.

Three print and three online prototypes were created by professional news designers to reflect possible versions of a typical newspaper (or Web site) story. The first print and online prototypes were designed to represent a traditional approach utilizing a text-based narrative with an inverted-pyramid-style lead story. The second versions utilized some alternative story forms such as a map and a fact box in addition to a text story. The third versions contained no traditional narrative elements. These prototype variations helped test how visual story structures relate to information processing, storage and retrieval.

Another unique aspect of this research was the inclusion of sequential and temporal information with content analysis methodologies. Properly describing an individual's exposure to visual information over time requires the preservation of event sequences and the incorporation of dependent observations. Typical content analysis does not account for this information. However, using statistical models, such as Markov chains, allows previous observations to provide useful information to predict future observations within an individual. Behavioral and cognition research has to accommodate previous information when modeling individual responses to media stimuli. One goal of this study is to introduce probabilistic dependence for content analysis methodologies, which traditionally have taken the approach of observation independence. Continually developing analytic tools will help researchers develop new theories and apply existing theories to a media environment where the lines between traditional print, television and radio media are disappearing. Simple measures of exposure to media lose validity when individuals attend to multiple devices and sources of information at the same time. Micro-exposure measures, including the use of physiological measures like eye tracking, quantify which pieces of information within a larger message are actually consumed and processed. Assuming dependence of micro-exposures in a news reading context means an individual is exposed to a small piece of the visual field containing information selected based on underlying cognitive processes. After exposure to one, small piece of visual information, the reader then selects another small piece of the visual field to read. The selection of what to read next is not made in a vacuum. The nature of the visual element currently being read provides information to improve predictions about where the individual will look next.

This study begins to answer how people look at different types of news story structures and describes the behavioral patterns used to consume news information. It addresses questions including: Can news designers use specific visual structures to efficiently communicate information that can be processed, stored and retrieved by readers? What are the mechanisms for how readers come to know what information is contained in news media, and then how do they consume this information? Do readers behave the same regardless of the media, or does the design and content of the media influence the ways readers interact with the media? Can what we learn using physiological measures like eye tracking be utilized with other types of measures to develop more realistic models of news reading?

The hypotheses test how individuals selectively read visual information and the implications of these behavioral patterns for cognition. Scanpath Theory (Noton & Stark, 1971), Feature Integration Theory (Treisman & Gelade, 1980) and Schema Theory (Wicks & Drew, 1991) predict underlying cognitive processes that allow individuals to make quick judgments as to the information available in the visual field. These heuristic judgments are based on the attributes of discrete visual structures. Readers spend time scanning and detecting all available information before selecting specific pieces of visual information. So, time during initial exposure will consist of scanning and detecting what type of information is available. After selecting and processing a portion of the visual field, individuals will select another portion of the visual field probabilistically determined in part by their current location of gaze. As the length of exposure increases, more time will be allocated toward reading and processing the visual field instead of detecting what information is available. This increase in processing and decrease in detection time is a manifestation of individuals creating mental maps that describe and associate information within the visual field. Using design to provide heuristic clues as to information contained within a visual structure, such as geographic information contained within a map, the amount of time and cognitive resources allocated toward detection and selection is decreased, and instead more cognitive resources are allocated to processing and storing information in memory.

The limited number of combinations used in one study will not provide results that will apply to all news reading. Instead, the primary objective of this study is to provide valid justification for using specific types of visual structures to communicate specific information most effectively. The results provide foundational models for how specific story forms often used in news design are selected, parsed, processed and stored in memory. Future research must build upon this macro design framework to understand how specific combinations of story-form type, size and orientation can allow reliable predictions as to configurations of these attributes that maximize information retention and minimize the costs of production. As an example, news designers should have a quantifiable justification for the size, shape and orientation of a photograph and caption text. All design choices come with tradeoffs. A photograph might demand running at a specific size based on the information and importance. However, this increase in photograph size means other information structures must be resized, deleted or moved within the visual field. This tradeoff should be made intelligently based on an overall increase in information retention, positive attitude toward the information, or some other metric of success for the information conveyed within the visual field.

Hopefully other researchers will be able to use the analytic tools and conceptual framework developed in this study as a starting point to quantify news design. Whether they work for newspapers, television stations or as independent bloggers, all information producers can benefit from a more systematic and quantifiable approach to making design choices. News design should prioritize consumer uses and needs for information. There will and should be room for design creativity, but the primary objective of news is to convey information to readers or viewers. This primary objective should be the focus of news design.

---

# Chapter 2
# Literature Review

Developing a valid framework for efficiently designing and delivering news content requires a theoretical understanding of how individuals consume and think about visual information. Because this study utilizes eye-tracking measures, the first responsibility is to describe the rationale for using behavioral measures as valid proxy measures for cognition. After this proxy relationship is detailed, a theoretical cognition framework for how people detect, select, process and store information will be discussed as it relates to news design. The cognition framework will describe how information is stored in memory and conceptually linked based on prior experiences and to fit within underlying mental constructs. Understanding the processes of vision and cognition will allow news designers to utilize underlying mental constructs to lower the cognitive effort to parse and assimilate new visual information.

Directly measuring cognitive processes can be accomplished through brain imaging techniques such as function magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI). However prohibitive costs and tightly controlled testing environments make direct cognitive measures impractical for widespread use and replication by academics and, more importantly, news producers themselves. Researchers have more commonly utilized physiological measures like heart rate (Lang, 2000; Wise et al., 2008) and eye movements (Garcia & Stark, 1991; Lewenstein et al., 2000; Outing & Ruel, 2004; Adam et al., 2007; Bucher & Schumacher, 2006; Holsanova et al., 2006) as behavioral indicators of underlying cognitive processes. Essentially, using behavioral and physiological measures can be proxy measures for cognition. This literature review builds a case that eye movement, as measured by eye-tracking hardware, is a reliable and valid proxy measure for cognition.

Once visual information has been consumed, the brain processes, sorts and stores pieces of that information based on underlying constructs. Visual design of information should influence how efficiently a message can pass through the different stages of cognition. The number of choices and the types of available choices should affect how a person consumes visual information. The types of visual structure used to transfer information, whether plain text, charts or maps, should affect how well specific types of information can be processed, stored and later retrieved. Finally, the types of information individuals seek or find interesting should not necessarily be uniform. Education, media usage and other life experiences could alter how people view and process visual information. There are many ways to tell a story or convey information. A theoretical understanding of the vision process and the underlying cognitive schemas used to organize information in the brain will serve as the basis for a framework to allow communication scholars and practitioners to make more informed design and delivery choices.

## Eye Movements

In order to understand the process of eye tracking, one first must understand some basics about the process of eye movements as well as the common definitions (Chaffee, 1991). Essentially, eye tracking is a collection of methodologies used to record eye-movement data (Cooke, 2005). Implementation requires the use of hardware and software to record these movements and generate data in a form usable for analysis. These data are composed of fixations and saccades. Fixations are defined as "pauses over informative regions of interest" within a stimulus (Salvucci & Goldberg, 2000, p. 71). These pauses are assumed to allow the mind to take a visual snapshot of a limited visual field, typically the size of a quarter on a flat stimulus held at arm's length from a person (Cooke, 2005). Fixations "indicate one's spatial focus of attention over time" (Josephson, 2004). The minimum duration of a single fixation can vary depending on the image density of a stimulus or display (Goldberg & Kotval, 1999), but common operational definitions for fixations do exist. Josephson and Holmes (2002) use 100 milliseconds as the minimum amount of time necessary for the eyes to look at a single position before a fixation is counted as being indicative of information processing. Others use a longer duration of 250 milliseconds (Rayner, 1978; Pan et al., 2004). Researchers using other physiological measures, such as heart rate, have shown an orienting response can occur as fast as 50 milliseconds. However, visual information held in temporary storage for less than 300 milliseconds is not passed for further processing (Lang, 2000). Therefore, a 300-millisecond threshold is justified for measuring eye movements indicative of cognition and reducing data noise. Eye-movements that occur faster than this threshold are not passed for cognitive processing.

Fixation duration, or the cumulated time spent on one element before moving the eyes, is an indicator of the depth of information processing (Juhasz & Rayner, 2003). It is assumed that the longer an individual spends looking at something, the more complete the information processing, encoding and storage. When a fixation ends, the eyes undergo a saccade. Saccades are rapid, jerky movements of the eye that take place between fixations (Rayner, 1978; Pan et al., 2004), or "shifts of gaze produced by the oculomotor system" (Petit et al., 1996, p. 153). These movements typically last for 25 to 30 milliseconds (Williams, et al., 2005; McConkie & Loschky, 2002). Although saccades are not directly of interest for eye-tracking research, it is important to understand what happens between fixations. One could incorrectly interpret these small movements and twitches as informative and indicative of attention. Saccadic movements essentially fill the gap between the end of one fixation and start of another.

The transition from a moving eye (saccade) to a stationary eye (fixation) is not instantaneous. The eye gradually slows, perhaps overshooting the target and returning to a desired fixation location (Wiener, 1948). Saccadic movements occur in less time than the orienting-response threshold of 50 milliseconds often used for physiological measures (Lang, 2000; Wise et al., 2008), so it is assumed that visual information processing pauses during saccades (Salvucci & Goldberg, 2000). Williams et al. (2005) suggests this temporary shutdown of vision is to prevent the blur that would occur as the eyes realign. Without this pause, visual information would be coming too fast to be processed. Instead of the brain having to filter out the extra visual noise introduced by overloaded vision, the path of fixations across a visual field resembles a series of quick cuts instead of panning from location to location, to use analogies from motion pictures. Visual processing pauses until the eye is stable for long enough to generate an orienting response at approximately 50 milliseconds. Between 50 milliseconds and 300 milliseconds, visual information is held in temporary memory to allow detection. During fixations lasting longer than 300 milliseconds, information is passed from temporary memory for cognitive processing, encoding and storage. It is important to understand the physiological processes of eye movements because these biologically constrained movements describe a serial pattern for looking at a visual field. News readers cannot see everything at once. The eyes fixate and process one location approximately the size of a quarter coin on a surface at arm's length from the eyes. Readers utilize cognitive mechanisms to prioritize which regions to fixate first and then where to go next. These mechanisms determine how to allocate visual attention.

## Visual Attention

Individuals have cognitive mechanisms that prioritize which small piece of all available information should be processed first and which pieces should be subsequently processed. Visual attention describes the prioritizing of available visual information that generates an orienting response. Although eye tracking is a relatively young methodology, research of eye movements and visual attention predate the creation of hardware measurement. Von Helmholtz (1950) noted a belief that giving visual attention to objects was tied to perception of those objects. Eyes roam through a scene, or visual field, to pay attention to specific details within that visual field. Direction of eye movement indicates the interest of cognitive processing for an individual (Zhu & Ji, 2004). Duchowski summarizes that "although visual attention can be consciously directed to peripheral objects, eye movements reflect the will to inspect these objects in fine detail. In this sense, eye movements provide evidence of overt visual attention" (2007, p. 5). Visual objects are stored in memory with sensory cues that allow that visual object to be later retrieved and applied to visual objects to speed up detection (Von Helmholtz, 1950). James (1981) thought visual attention was a voluntary action to find regions within the visual field that have anticipated meaning or information.

Duchowski (2007) reconciles these constructs as complimentary components of visual attention. Eyes pass over the visual field to compile an awareness of the components within available objects. This scanning procedure is accomplished peripherally, or beyond the biological constraints of the eye to process at a high enough level to allow cognition. Peripheral detection also can be called parafoveal vision. Detailed inspection of the information in a region of the visual field is accomplished through foveal vision. Essentially, foveal vision is directed toward a small area that the brain can dedicate primary attention and information processing capacity (Reingold & Loschky, 2002). Central foveal vision is biologically restrained, based on the arrangement of rods and cones in the eye, within a 1- to 5-degree visual angle from the eye toward the visual field (Duchowski, 2007). This region is approximately the size of a quarter at an arm's length from the eyes. This area of central visual attention is used at the calibration threshold for many eye-tracking devices. These considerations will be detailed later.

The types of visual objects available are peripherally scanned with prior experience influencing which objects are detected as being of interest. This explicit separation of foveal and parafoveal vision is crucial to understanding the utility of eye tracking as a proxy measure for cognition. Newsreaders cannot look at everything at once. In-depth processing can only occur through foveal vision. Individuals must make choices of what to look at in what order. The ability to attract the attention of a newsreader is valuable. The ability to determine which visual structures reliably draw attention is tremendously valuable. A prime example is to have a quantifiable reason for displaying a photograph in a larger size versus a smaller size. Using a larger photograph instinctively seems like it should grab more attention because of the larger proportion of this structure within the overall visual field. However, this choice affects the rest of the visual field. Some other content must be resized, reformatted or eliminated. Perhaps the overal visual attention given to the combined elements is increased or perhaps it is decreased. News designers do not have valid answers for this. This design choice has quantifiable implications that need to be explored.

## Selection

Visual attention draws the eyes. Some process must then filter the different objects of interest to a single visual object that is selected for higher-order processing. Broadbent (1958) posited that information entering the brain is run through a "selective filter" that determines which messages are important and which are unimportant or simply background noise. This is an application of the Information Theory of Shannon and Weaver (1949) where a signal passes from sender to receiver while becoming noisy during transmission. The amount of information and the number of simultaneous channels between sender and receiver affect how accurately the receiver processes information. Broadbent (1958) was interested in how people select particular sounds when there are multiple people talking and with non-informative background noises. He wrote that humans have limited cognitive capacity and therefore attend to only one message at a time or risk high error rates in receiving the information. Although his research focused on sound, he states there should be no theoretical restriction of why a "selective filter" would not be used by other senses such as vision. For this study, this selective filter would allow a newsreader to see one piece of the visual field at a time. This would be akin to only allowing foveal vision to be useful. However, parafoveal, or peripheral, vision plays an important role in detecting what visual information is available.

Although only one piece of the visual field can be fixated for processing, the other available visual structures do provide heuristics of available information to allow an individual to create a prioritized ranking of the most important messages. Deutsch and Deutsch (1963) described "importance weightings" as an alternative to Broadbent's "selective filter" construct. They argued that all information is processed at the highest level with weightings applied to information to determine what information is processed further. An example might be standing in a crowded room. You could pay attention to each face equally, locate a specific face based on a preconception of importance, and then pay attention to comprehending the details of that face. These two processes cannot be directly integrated. The "selective filter" only allows one message to be attended to at a time because attending to simultaneous messages prevent accurate detection and selection for further processing. The "importance weighting" model requires simultaneous attention. Treisman (1964) reconciled these two constructs by proposing an "attenuation filter" that does not block unwanted messages but instead quiets them. While an individual can only attend to one message at a time, the individual is still aware other messages exist and can be later selected. The process of message selection should work similarly for audio and visual messages. Visual objects are peripherally detected and selected based on preconceptions of importance. The eyes fixate on a selected visual object, and foveal vision begins. Once a fixation has passed the 300-millisecond threshold, visual information is passed for cognition.

Applying Treisman's "attenuation filter" to news reading, an individual can allocate foveal gaze to one area of the visual field while maintaining an awareness of the other visual structures located within the visual field. The individual cannot process these peripheral structures to determine the types of information. A paragraph of text is easily identified, but there are no clues as to what information might be contained within. A map, however, can provide visual structure readily identifiable: this structure will contain geographic information. Attributes of the visual structures provide clues as to the information that should be or could be contained. These visual cues can help newsreaders take inventory of available information with less cognitive effort. This, in turn, should allow for quicker information prioritization. Less time detecting and prioritizing available information means newsreaders can allocate more time and cognitive resources toward processing and learning information.

## Cognition

Clearly the eyes and mind do not act as distinct entities but in a cooperative manner. Theories describing vision and cognition tend to separate events of automatic response from cognition. The previous section described behaviors such as orienting responses as nearly automatic reactions to stimuli based on inherent physiology and previous experiences. However, cognition is the combination of processes whereby information is parsed, organized based on characteristics of that information, encoded to allow future access and finally stored in memory. Cognition involves learning from information instead of merely being alerted to the presence of information.

Alfred Yarbus conducted some of the first eye-tracking research during the 1950s as an effort to understand how people processes complex images by a cognitive assembly of smaller parts. He asked questions related to an image and recorded eye movements as the subjects processing the image to solve the questions (Yarbus, 1967). Noton and Stark (1971) built on the work of Yarbus and used the term "scanpaths" to describe the eye movements of individuals as they construct the entirety of the visual field, or image, through sequentially viewed chunks or regions. Duchowski (2007) said that the Noton and Stark "Scanpath Theory" results support a process of visual attention where specific regions of interest to an individual are looked at in a serial manner via foveal vision for more detailed processing. Posner, Snyder and Davidson (1980) described this ability to shift attention as a "spotlight" mechanism. This concept is the visual equivalent to the "attenuation filter" Treisman (1964) proposed for how people selected specific sounds to process by quieting the non-important noise signals. A person can begin to process visual information from a small portion of the visual field by directing foveal vision to that area of interest. The other available visual information is muted or darkened so that peripheral, or parafoveal, vision can be used to detect visual structures but only foveal vision is used as the pathway from the eyes to the mind. Treisman and Gelade (1980) unified the "scanpath" and "spotlight" mechanisms to describe the entire processes for a person to detect what is available, direct primary attention to small regions and integrate these snapshots to create a complete mental version of the visual field.

The "Feature Integration Theory" of Treisman and Gelade describes how an individual assembles the small pieces gathered one at a time into a singular, mental representation of the whole visual field. Schema Theory (Wicks & Drew, 1991) describes how information is broken apart, categorized and stored within memory. Together, these two theories provide a way to relate what newsreaders see within the visual field with what information they process and store in memory.

### Feature Integration Theory

Von Helmholtz (1950) said that the brain uses visual cues to efficiently select items of interest from a visual field full of information. Treisman and Gelade (1980) developed Feature Integration Theory to describe how the mind can use visual attributes of color, size, positioning and distance as shortcuts to detect what information is available, select the most salient information and then evoke prior experiences to process and assimilate this information. Upon exposure to a visual field, a person creates an "immediate impression of recognizable objects, organized coherently in a spatial framework (Treisman & Gelade, 1980, p. 97). FIT posits that a parallel strategy registers all visual elements using heuristics of visual attributes to anticipate the types of content available in various visual structures. A serial mechanism then is utilized to look at visual elements one at a time if they are not easily recognizable. During this stage, individual elements also are grouped together to assemble a larger unit, such as photograph and the text caption being cognitively grouped as part of a larger but cohesive content unit. These groupings are referred to as "conjunctions" (Treisman et al., 1977). News designers could find great utility in having the reader create these conjunctions, which should speed up detection of all visual elements on a page in order for the reader to select information of primary saliency. However, attention overload creates "illusory conjunctions" and slows selection because more cognitive resources are required to undo these false associations. Some individual visual elements with very strong informational associations become inseparable for detection (Treisman & Gelade, 1980). A map of the United States of America is comprised of 48 touching states, plus Alaska and Hawaii. Many of these states are quickly recognizable if they existed in visual isolation. When presented together as a single map, FIT says that all states effectively become a single visual element for visual detection.

### Schema Theory

The Feature Integration Theory describes how previous experiences and visual attributes help people discern visual elements. However, FIT does not explain the recursive process of how experience is encoded to allow faster detection during a future exposure to visual information. Schema Theory fills this hole. Fiske and Taylor (1984) described a schema as a structure allowing for organization of information. Cognitive schemas allow for information to be stored within an individual's memory in an organizational structure abstracted from prior knowledge and experiences (Wicks & Drew, 1991).

When individuals are exposed to new information, and assuming cognitive processes have activated, individuals "attempt to assimilate it into an existing schema" (Wicks & Drew, 1991, p. 156). No individual piece of information describes the entirety of the topic. FIT describes how parts of the visual field are mentally stitched to create a whole. Schema theory describes an analogous process of how individual pieces of information are systematically stored with other pieces of related information to create a more complete understanding or knowledge within an individual. Schemas are used in the physical world as well as the brain. Libraries utilize schemas to shelve books of similar topics together. There are numerous other ways to sort, such as alphabetically by title or perhaps based on publication dates. However, alphabetical and chronological sorting are fundamentally inferior to organizational schemas based on subject areas if the primary objective is to store collective knowledge for future retrieval that allows an individual to find all information necessary to understand a specific topic or make a decision. So, think of cognitive schemas as structures that allow for multiple associations between pieces of information. These associations allow the brain to quickly retrieve and compile a whole of the individual's knowledge as a response to a stimulus or event. When reading news related to a disease, the individual retrieves learned information, assimilates new information and then stores this improved understanding. Simply, humans learn from exposure to information. They do not have to approach each situation or stimulus as a blank slate. For journalists and news designers, structuring information that naturally matches underlying schemas should allow for information to be more easily stored to memory.

Schemas need not be fixed. Schema theory suggests that processed information that fits consistently within evoked knowledge structures, or schemas, reinforce that schema and make it more useful for storage and later retrieval of information. Conversely, new information may require a modification to an existing schema or the generation of a new schema altogether. One schema may allow effective storage and retrieval of geographic information but simultaneously be ineffective for temporal information. Schemas are optimized for specific classes of information, or semantic categories, such as time, location and proportions. News creators that design and deliver information fitting most consistently with underlying cognitive schemas should allow news consumers to more efficiently assimilate the news with existing knowledge.

Rosch (1975) found that the structure of organized memory had clear relationships with the ways information within semantic categories is processed. A comparison between text and photographs showed less time was required to match photographs of like content than text of like content (Posner, 1969). This suggests photographs "may be closer to the nature of the underlying representations of superordinate categories" (Rosch, 1975, p. 192). Rosch suggests that the structure of semantic categories has implications to how "concept attainment" or cognition should be studied. For news designers, the structure of semantic categories should be a primary factor driving how different types of information are packaged and transmitted to news consumers. For example, pie charts are used to show the proportions, such as the proportions of male or female students in a high school. Other common semantic categories utilized in news design are geographic, temporal and scalar comparisons. Maps visually represent a semantic relationship that some items exist in relative position to other items. Timelines represent comparisons of time. Line charts represent how the value of something changes with respect to another variable. These different visual structures allow the brain to anticipate what type of information and comparisons may exist during detection and reading-priority assignment. News designers will benefit from quantifiable understanding of how different visual structures affect schema creation and modification.

Semantic categories can be thought of as constructs or "bounded entities, whose membership is defined by an item's possession of a simple set of criterial features, in which all instances possessing the criterial attributes have a full and equal degree of membership" (Rosch, 1975, p. 193). So, attributes of information provide cues as to what types of underlying concepts are contained and prompt cognition mechanisms to efficiently parse, process and store that information. Rosch also found that the underlying structure of semantic categories can be altered through practice. So, while there may be some visual structures that are innately understood as containing specific types of information, other visual structures become more readily recognized through repeated exposure. There are two primary implications for news designers. First, information should be designed with the news consumer in mind. Visual structures should have innate and obvious visual cues as to the contained concepts. For example, a map should be used for geographic information and not chronological information. Second, design consistency should help the news consumer practice how to process visual structures without such obvious cues as a map. News elements such as a caption accompanying a photograph do not have the obvious visual cues as to what kind of information is contained. However, consistently positioning captions in proximity to the related photograph should help the news consumer learn that this discrete visual structure, the caption, is providing information related to the photograph.

An individual has finite cognitive resources to allocate toward detection and processing of visual information. Cognitive resources used for recognizing visual structures are resources that cannot be allocated toward processing. So, it seems logical that news designers should utilize visual structures that make information in the visual field quick and easy for the news consumer to detect. Sometimes the structure may be obvious. Often the optimal visual structure is not obvious. Particularly when not obvious, visual structures should be consistently used to transmit information that falls into the same underlying semantic categories. This consistency gives the news consumer experience and practice in using a visual structure, and the practice should make future experiences with similar visual structures more cognitively efficient.

## Motivations

Finding an optimal visual structure to aid detection and cognitive processing assumes that individuals have equivalent previous life experiences with information structures and equivalent motivations to read and understand the information. Wigfield and Guthrie found reading habits are driven by self-efficacy, intrinsic-extrinsic motivations and social dynamics (1997). Although these constructs are not measured in this study, and are controlled through the experimental design, a brief overview is necessary. The holistic nature of reading behavior and cognition is both a product of the currently viewed visual stimulus but also as a culmination of all prior reading experiences.

Motivations are conceptually connected to self-efficacy, or a person's perceived strength of their own effectiveness within a specific situation or context (Bandura, 1977). For news reading, as well as for reading scientific or technical content, an individual's self-efficacy could have an impact on looking at the reading situation as an avenue for learning and discover or to dread it as encountering unfamiliar information they perceive as difficult to understand. Perceived self-efficacy then influences an individual's motivations toward reading and learning.

Wigfield and Guthrie (1997) describe intrinsic motivations as those motivations that an individual has such as a personal interest in a topic and perceived value to himself or herself for understanding new information or successfully completing a task. Eccles et al. (1983) similarly defined these concepts as components of task value. Extrinsic motivations include outward goals of looking smart in front of others or doing something as competitive activity to best others. Related to extrinsic motivations are other social aspects of motivation. Some individuals exist within social spheres that encourage specific motivations while discouraging others.

Within a news-reading context, intrinsic motivations include reading news to understand the world at large or a specific topic related to the individual. An intrinsic motivation for reading news related to a health issue could be to more fully understand the topic in order to make a more-informed decision at a later time. Conversely, extrinsic motivations for news reading are to appear to others as well informed. Perhaps the information can be used during everyday conversions in an effort to increase the individual's perceived intelligence by others. Clearly these two categories of motivations are not mutually exclusive. Some content may be personally interesting because of a specific hobby, activity or utility. Likewise, there can be extrinsic motivations for reading the same content, such as being perceived as an opinion leader within a community or public sphere dedicated to that hobby or interest. Social pressure could encourage reading specific information because of a perceived need to be informed, such as global warming, Middle East politics or derivative securities.

Motivations, both intrinsic and extrinsic, influence how an individual consumes and processes information (Guthrie et al., 2000). These motivations are both a function of internal values and goals as well as the values and goals of the various public spheres within which a person lives, works, plays, learns and communicates. Individuals that make behavioral choices based on intrinsic motivations, or task values, have been found to make decisions based on the utility of learning and allocate more leisure time toward reading (Durik et al., 2006). Other research has suggested that interest toward a specific message, an intrinsic motivation, yields a reduction in the knowledge gap between individuals differing educational levels (Kwak, 1999). This motivation contingency model (Viswanath et al., 1993) is a modification of the knowledge gap hypothesis described by Tichenor, Donohue and Olien (1970).

The knowledge gap hypothesis says an individual of higher socioeconomic status acquires information faster than an individual of lower status, so each media message contributes to a widening gap between the knowledge levels of the two individuals. The motivational contingency model suggests that individuals with less formal education can acquire more knowledge when intrinsically motivated than an individual with more education but less motivation. Kwak (1999) also found a significant three-way interaction between an individual's interest in a topic, media usage and the amount of knowledge acquisition. In the Kwak study, individuals with high interest in newspapers and high interest in a topic had similar knowledge scores, regardless of the level of formal education. These results should provide incentive for news designers to think about making content, whether it text, audio, video or a combination, interesting for news consumers. Providing content in forms that fit with the expectations and interests of news consumers should yield greater knowledge acquisition than having content fit into an arbitrary storyform.

The current study does attempt to measure motivation, but a demographic comparison between participants of different educational levels could be interesting. There is no reason to suspect some people will learn more efficiently from online versus print newspapers. Visual structures transmitted through a platform have implications for cognition, but the platform itself should not matter. A two-dimensional surface is basically the same whether that surface is created from paper, plastic, metal or other materials. However, the capabilities of an online newspaper to utilize a more diverse range of visual structures could yield more efficient cognition. Another possibility is that people with different levels of education or motivation will react differently to the same visual structure. Although these questions are controlled by the experimental design of the current study, future research certainly should investigate these issues.

## Hypotheses and Research Questions

Eye movements include fixations and saccades. Counting a fixation requires the eye to remain stable for some amount of time before viewing the visual field switches from detection to cognition. During vision but before a fixation is registered, the eyes and mind are trying to inventory what types of visual information is available based on heuristics or shortcuts. Previous experiences as described by Scanpath Theory (Noton & Stark, 1971), Feature Integration Theory (Treisman & Gelade, 1980) and Schema Theory (Wicks & Drew, 1991) predict that visual information from previous experiences are stored and categorized within the mind to allow for faster detection of available information in future viewing scenarios. These underlying schemas and related cognitive maps should speed detection of visual structure as proxy for detecting the available information within the visual field. If this is true, then an individual would not need to allocate the same amount of time and cognitive resources to all regions of the visual field in order to choose what information to fixate upon for further cognition. Individuals will use previous experiences and personal interests to select areas of the visual field instead of looking in a random fashion. Therefore,

> H1: Visual elements, or structural types of news content, on a stimulus will not have equal probabilities of being fixed upon by the reader.

Schema theory (Wicks & Drew, 1991), in particular, posits that information acquired through cognition is parsed, or separated into smaller peces of the whole, and stored in memory based on conceptual linkages that allow for faster retrieval of related information when needed as well as faster storage of newly acquired information. These speed gains should be the result of fewer finite, cognitive resources being allocated toward parsing visual information. Surplus cognitive resources will be directed toward storing information based on underlying cognitive schemas. Visual structures restricted to the fewest categories of information, such as geographic, time or ordering, should allow more cognitive resources to be allocated toward storage of information with fewer cognitive resources allocated toward parsing that information during the stages of cognition. If this is true, news design prototypes that maximize storage and minimize parsing should yield better scores when individuals are quizzed after exposure.

> H2: Readers given prototype news pages that utilize smaller, discrete storytelling elements will perform better information recognition.

Individuals exposed to visual stimuli are constantly optimizing, modifying or creating scanpaths. Items are detected, fixated upon and processed. Every repetition of these steps becomes faster because new information is incorporated into an individual's understanding of what information should be available within different types of visual structures (Treisman & Gelade, 1980). For example, if every photograph within a newspaper or website includes a caption beneath the photo, the individual stores this pattern and can later know that the text underneath a photo is a related caption without actually reading that text and creating this conceptual linkage again. Upon initial exposure to a visual stimulus, an individual should look at many visual structures in rapid succession to create a mental inventory of the available information before selecting a structure for more in-depth cognition. However, after creating this spatial map of the available information, the individual should not have to repeat this detection process during the remainder of exposure to the visual stimulus.

> H3a: The frequency of elements fixated by a person will be greatest during initial exposure.

> H3b: The frequency of fixated elements will decrease as exposure time increases.

Beyond the theoretically based hypotheses, there are a tremendous number of exploratory research questions that could be asked of this data. The most obvious is to investigate whether the effects of visual-structure differences on reading behavior and learning are consistent across platforms or strongly determined by that platform. In the context of the current study, will small, discrete visual structures have the same effects for a print newspaper and an online news website? Unfortunately the inherent characteristics of certain platforms, such as hyperlinking for websites, makes a direct comparison impossible. Although the basic task of reading text on a two-dimensional plane seems like it should be consistent across print and online, there is the possibility that inherent characteristics of the platforms change a common task into two divergent experiences.

> RQ1: Will medium or story structure be more important in determining how people read the news?

There are questions of whether demographic variables are important in determining how differently individuals behave and learn when presented with different visual stimuli. Many researchers have shown demographics and social norms are related to motivations toward discovery, learning and behavior toward others based on how individuals are rewarded and punished for different behaviors by peer groups (Hoover-Dempsey et al., 1987; Dodge et al., 1994; Heimer, 1997). Both natural and socially enforced characteristics of individuals could affect how people read and learn.

> RQ2a: How does gender relate with reading patterns?

> RQ2b: How does age relate with reading patterns?

> RQ2c: How does education relate with reading patterns?

> RQ2d: How does self-reported media usage relate with reading patterns?

## Summary

This literature review built a case that eye movement, as measured by eye-tracking hardware, is a reliable and valid proxy measure for cognition. Scanpath Theory (Noton & Stark, 1971) describes how sequences and patterns of eye fixations and saccades allow an individual to see and process a visual field. Physiological constraints of the eyes only allow for a small, central portion of the visual field to be processed. Feature Integration Theory (Treisman & Gelade, 1980) explains how the serial processing of one regional of visual interest followed by another and another can create a singular representation of the entire visual field within the mind. Schema Theory (Wicks & Drew, 1991) posits that visual information that passes through the stages of cognition is stored in memory and conceptually linked based on previous experiences with similar visual information and underlying constructs.

Visual design of information that acknowledges the serial acquisition and structural relationships described by these theories should allow a message to more effectively pass through the different stages of cognition. The number of choices and the types of available choices will affect how a person processes visual information. The types of visual structure used to transfer information, whether plain text, charts or maps, will affect how well specific types of information are processed, stored and later retrieved. Understanding the processes of vision and cognition will allow news designers to utilize underlying cognitive schemas to lower the cognitive effort to parse and assimilate new visual information.

Eye-tracking analyses of news are rare. The literature review described several fields related to mass communication where researchers and practitioners have utilized eye-tracking research. In the social sciences, eye tracking has been used to answer questions related to reading, scene perception and visual search (Duchowski, 2003). Industrial engineering applications include ergonomics for airplane cockpits (Wetzel, 1997) and other instrumentation layouts. Scholars of human-computer interaction use eye tracking to conduct usability tests of software applications and virtual reality systems. The most similar application to print and online news have been in marketing and advertising research (Duchowski, 2003). Eye movements have inherent characteristics that are difficult to reconcile with traditional content analysis techniques. However, sequential observations can be analyzed through contingency tables after incorporating Markov chains. The next chapter will describe how fixations can be harnessed as a content analysis tool for print and digital news gazed upon in sequences during free-reading experiments.

